11.8 SP Release Notes (#10767)
mendix/docs: content/en/docs/releasenotes/studio-pro/11/11.8.md

---
title: "11.8"
url: /releasenotes/studio-pro/11.8/
description: "The release notes for Mendix Studio Pro 11.8 (including all patches) with details on new features, bug fixes, and known issues."
weight: 92
---

## 11.8.0 {#1180}

**Release date: Febuary ___, 2026**

{{% button color="info" href="https://marketplace.mendix.com/link/studiopro/11.8.0" text="Go to Marketplace" title="Download version 11.8.0 from the Marketplace" %}}

For more guidance, see the official [11.8 Mendix release blog](____________).

### New Features
    

> - We added a **Cancel synchronization** nanoflow activity and action to stop synchronization.

Reviewer: Activity or action? I think we should use one or the other?

Reviewer 2: Activity. I'll fix this one.

- We added a `reloadApp` function to the `mx-api/ui` Client API that allows you to reload your application. By passing the optional `withState` parameter, you can preserve the application's state during the reload. This method is not supported on native mobile. For more information, refer to the [Client API documentation](/apidocs-mxsdk/apidocs/client-api/).
- We added non-interrupting event sub-processes to the workflow editor. This allows users to trigger optional process flows at any point during a workflow's execution. By using the `notify workflow` mechanism and targeting the sub-process's start event, these additional flows can be initiated without interrupting the main workflow.

> - We added a `allowUpload` flag on `file` and `image` properties that provides upload capabilities to progressive web apps. We added new types `EditableFileValue` and `EditableImageValue` to provide upload related methods (such as `setValue`, `setValidator`, and other typical ones). This flag is optional to ensure backwards compatibility, with the default value being `false`. Native widgets do not currently support this feature.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- We added an `allowUpload` flag on `file` and `image` properties that provides upload capabilities to progressive web apps. We added new types `EditableFileValue` and `EditableImageValue` to provide upload-related methods (such as `setValue` and `setValidator`). This flag is optional to ensure backwards compatibility, with the default value being `false`. Native widgets do not currently support this feature.
```

### Improvements
    

> - The `OQL DELETE FROM` statement now supports associations with on delete behavior:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- The `OQL DELETE FROM` statement now supports associations with [on delete](/refguide/association-properties/#delete-behavior) behavior with the following functionality:
```

    * **Delete associated objects as well**

>     * **Delete the object only if there are no associated objects**

Reviewer: I don't think these are UX elements?
```suggestion
    * Delete associated objects as well
    * Delete the object only if there are no associated objects
```

Author: Implemented

- [Date Picker](/refguide/date-picker/) now shows placeholder (or date format if placeholder is empty) even if the widget is in read only state. This makes the date picker widget consistent with other input widgets.

### Updated Language Codes for Hebrew and Indonesian

We updated the ISO 639 language codes for **Hebrew** and **Indonesian** to align with the current standard:
 - **Hebrew**: Changed from `iw_IL` (deprecated) to `he_IL` (current standard)
 - **Indonesian**: Changed from `in_ID` (deprecated) to `id_ID` (current standard)

#### Impact

If your app uses **Hebrew** or **Indonesian**, these languages will be marked with an asterisk in your project, and you will see a deprecation warning.

#### Migration Steps

To migrate to the updated language codes:
 - Add the non-deprecated version of the language to your app (one without asterisk)
 - Move existing translations from the deprecated language to the new version using **Language** > **Language Operations**
 - Remove the deprecated language version (marked with asterisk) from your app

This ensures your app uses the current ISO 639 standard and avoids future compatibility issues.

#### Other Improvements

> 

Reviewer: This is the wrong heading level.
Also, we don't normally have "Other Improvements" all the improvements should be together. I suggest moving the **Updated Language Codes** to after the **Improvements** section and not having two sets of improvements.

Author: Done

> - We improved performance for repeatable containment widgets that contain an input widget, when not running the React client. This improvement is particularly noticeable in scenarios where a DG2 has multiple columns configured with custom content containing input widgets. (Ticket 251521)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- We improved the performance of repeatable containment widgets that contain an input widget, when not running the React client. This improvement is particularly noticeable in scenarios where a Data Grid 2 widget has multiple columns configured with custom content containing input widgets. (Ticket 251521)
```

- When the progress dialog only has one step, we now only show the progress bar.

> - We improved performance for mx.exe diff command. Now the command consumes less memory and executes faster.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- We improved performance of the `mx.exe diff` command. Now the command consumes less memory and executes faster.
```

> - The macOS installer now includes the Mendix Version Selector. This enhancement allows macOS Studio Pro users to open applications directly from Sprintr, double-click MPR/MPK files to open them, and utilize the 'Start from Maia' feature within the Mendix Portal.

Reviewer: Need to remove _Sprintr_ - but not clear whether the stuff about double-clicking the MPR/MPK is just describing how to open them directly or is an additional feature.

```suggestion
- The macOS installer now includes the Mendix Version Selector. This enhancement allows macOS Studio Pro users to open applications directly from the **Apps** page of the Mendix Portal, double-click MPR/MPK files to open them, and utilize the 'Start from Maia' feature within the Mendix Portal.
```

> - The Studio Pro on macOS was renamed to Mendix Studio Pro.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Studio Pro on macOS was renamed to Mendix Studio Pro.
```

> - We improved the error message in case the database does not contain a pre-analysis migration version. That can happen only when upgrading from a Mendix version earlier than 5.10.

Reviewer: Mendix 5.10!!

```suggestion
- We improved the error message when the database does not contain a pre-analysis migration version. That can happen only when upgrading from a Mendix version earlier than 5.10.
```

> - We have removed redundant button "Maia Explain" from the logic editors in favor of "Maia Explain" item in the context menu of the App Explorer.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- We have removed the redundant button "Maia Explain" from the logic editors in favor of a "Maia Explain" item in the context menu of the App Explorer.
```

- We simplified Maia preferences by adding a single toggle to enable or disable all Maia features at once.

> - We fixed the issue in OData Exists queries where an XPath constraint with nested-associations would result in incorrect OData filter (Ticket 261698).

Reviewer: This is a fix.

> - The OpenAPI documentation pane in Studio Pro now allows you to copy text using Ctrl+C.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- The OpenAPI documentation pane in Studio Pro now allows you to copy text using <kbd>Ctrl</kbd>+<kbd>C</kbd>.
```

- We improved the Gradle settings in the Preferences. The Gradle location will now not be hidden if Gradle synchronization is disabled.
- We clarified an error message when cloning or checking out a branch into a directory with a long path.
- We increased the width of scrollbars on editors and some of the panes to increase usability.

> - We introduced an opt-in runtime setting `MaxRetrieveAmount` that limits the maximum amount of objects retrieved by database datasource operation. (Tickets 236618, 247111)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- We introduced an opt-in runtime setting `MaxRetrieveAmount` that limits the maximum number of objects retrieved by a database datasource operation. (Tickets 236618, 247111)
```

> - We improved the `reloadApp` function in the `mx-api/ui` Client API to better handle sessionStorage quota exceeded errors. When `withState` is `true` and the browser's sessionStorage quota is exceeded, it now throws a `ReloadStateQuotaExceededError` that you can catch and handle. For more information, refer to the [Client API documentation](apidocs-mxsdk/apidocs/client-api-11/). When re-running an app in development and the sessionStorage quota is exceeded, the reload gracefully falls back to reloading without preserving state. (Ticket 264656)

Reviewer: [Line 19](https://github.com/mendix/docs/pull/10767/changes#diff-3f8bacea9f481b6aeaf306b196fed0c275a2160676e0c41506f6efc6d691d6f9R19) says this is a new function - so difficult to improve it. I think this should be combined with Line 19 (or removed). Not sure how there is a ticket with this if the function is new.

Author: I added an anchor link from this fix to the mention of the API function above.

> - We improved the `Set all to` toggle in the entity access rules editor so that when some members have access rights and others don't, the toggle now disables all rights instead of enabling them. This prevents the `Write` toggle from unexpectedly affecting read access.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- We improved the `Set all to` toggle in the entity access rules editor so that when some members have access rights and others do not, the toggle now disables all rights instead of enabling them. This prevents the `Write` toggle from unexpectedly affecting read access.
```

### Fixes

> - We fixed an issue when studio pro was not able to find git after fresh installation if it was run from installer. (Tickets 232343, 232540, 232452, 234800, 231989)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- We fixed an issue when Studio Pro was not able to find git after fresh installation if it was run from installer. (Tickets 232343, 232540, 232452, 234800, 231989)
```

> - We fixed an issue that when document was modified on one source and deleted on other during combination process user had no option to resolve a conflict by deleting a document. (Ticket 263119)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- We fixed an issue where when a document was modified in one source and deleted in another, user had no option to resolve a conflict by deleting the document during the combination process. (Ticket 263119)
```

> - We fixed an issue where an Oops dialog appeared with conditional editability settings when a page contains multiple widgets with the same name, for example as a side effect of a merge. (Ticket 264502)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- We fixed an issue where an Oops dialog appeared for conditional editability settings when a page contains multiple widgets with the same name, for example as a side effect of a merge. (Ticket 264502)
```

Author: done

> - We fixed an issue in offline apps that could result in errors like "[Synchronization] SQLiteError: table mx10414574138294561$_guidToTable has no column named inaccessibleAttrs" by ensuring database migrations happen properly for all users in the client database. (Tickets 264910, 265393, 269740)

Reviewer: Do we need to put this as a code snippet to avoid losing the "["?

```suggestion
- We fixed an issue in offline apps that could result in errors like `"[Synchronization] SQLiteError: table mx10414574138294561$_guidToTable has no column named inaccessibleAttrs"` by ensuring database migrations happen properly for all users in the client database. (Tickets 264910, 265393, 269740)
```

Author: done

- We fixed the NullPointerException which occurred when a session token was being generated but the user name was changed in the meantime. (Ticket 265403)

> - In the logic editors, we fixed an issue when Show Message activity could have an empty caption after initial loading of the microflow. (Ticket 268024)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- In the logic editors, we fixed an issue where Show Message activity could have an empty caption after initial loading of the microflow. (Ticket 268024)
```

Author: done

> - We fixed an issue that caused setting the image of a building block to show an error dialog instead of resizing the image. (Ticket 268856)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- We fixed an issue that displayed an error dialog when setting the image of a building block instead of resizing the image. (Ticket 268856)
```

Author: Rejected (commenting here to show I checked)

> - In the logic editors, we fixed an issue when Extracting submicroflow the sequence flow in the original microflow had invalid condition value, and extracted microflow was missing one. (Ticket 269233).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- In the logic editors, we fixed an issue when Extracting submicroflow if the sequence flow in the original microflow had an invalid condition value, and the extracted microflow was missing one. (Ticket 269233).
```

> - We fixed an issue where a long-running after startup microflow causes the node to be assumed crashed by other nodes. (Ticket 269993)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- We fixed an issue where a long-running after startup microflow caused other nodes to assume that the node had crashed. (Ticket 269993)
```

Author: Implemented

- We fixed an issue where an Oops dialog appeared with conditional editability settings when a widget referenced a default variable. (Ticket 270420)

> - We fixed an issue where an Oops pop-up window was displayed when a widget with a data source contained expressions referring to unavailable variables. (Ticket 270865)

Reviewer: I think we could group all the Oops dialog related to conditional editability fixes together under https://github.com/mendix/docs/pull/10767/changes#r2832730842

- We fixed an issue where deleting an external object with a local association to it that uses the direct association storage format would fail with an exception.
- We fixed an issue in workflow user tasks, where having no fallback outcome in majority or threshold criteria with a single outcome would prevent the runtime from starting.
- We fixed an issue in the modernized app explorer where pressing the DEL key in the search input would trigger document deletion instead of text deletion.
- We fixed an issue in the modernized app explorer where the version number of an add-on module would not show.
- We fixed the issue in the modernized App Explorer where the visibility icon was not displayed when the export level was set to 'Usable'.
- We fixed an issue in the modernized App Explorer where pressing [Escape] would not clear the search query.
- We fixed an issue in the modernized App Explorer where the hotkey SHIFT+F10 for opening the context menu did not work.

> - We fixed an issue in the modernized App Explorer where a Domain Model node with View Entity documents as children would automatically expand on double click.

Reviewer: "We fixed a number of issues in the modernized App Explorer" - would make this easier to find and navigate!

And can you put `<kbd>keyname</kbd>` HTML around the keys.

> - We fixed an issue in several right click context menu's where for MacOS several hotkey combinations were displayed wrong.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- We fixed an issue in the Mac version of Studio Pro where several right click context menus displayed several hotkey combinations wrongly.
```

> - We fixed SQLite Error 5: 'database is locked' error.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- We fixed an `SQLite Error 5: 'database is locked'` error.
```

Author: implemented

- We fixed an issue where 'access denied' exceptions could occur during rebase, merge, cherry-pick, revert, or feature branch merge operations.

> - Fixed an issue where Maia explain for Microflows crashes sometimes.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- We fixed an issue where Maia explain for Microflows crashes sometimes.
```

Author: Implemented and fixed the tense on crashes

- We fixed an issue in Maia chat causing it to crash when a Studio Pro version attribute was missing in a reference.

> - We fixed scenarios in Android where navigating fields of a Dataview, of different types, would not be possible using an external keyboard.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- We fixed scenarios in Android where navigating fields of a Dataview, of different types, was not possible using an external keyboard.
```

Author: implemented

> - We fixed an issue in the call external action activity in Studio Pro where resolving inconsistencies would clear additional attributes.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- We fixed an issue in the **Call external action** activity in Studio Pro where resolving inconsistencies would clear additional attributes.
```

Author: I need to get better about bolding activities/actions in release notes. Implemented.

- We fixed an issue in the OpenAPI documents of published REST services. The dates used in examples now use correct values.

> - The consumed REST service editor in Studio Pro is now available in all languages that Studio Pro supports, not just English.

Reviewer: This looks like an improvement, not a fix.

Author: Ya, it could go either way depending on if it was broken and is now fixed, or if this language rollout was the plan. I'll move it up to Improvements.

> - We fixed `com.mendix.systemwideinterfaces.core.IUser::getUserName` which was always returning the user name at the time of login. It's now returning the actual user name after a cached session has been revalidated.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- We fixed `com.mendix.systemwideinterfaces.core.IUser::getUserName` which was always returning the user name at the time of login. It is now returning the actual user name after a cached session has been revalidated.
```

> - Resolved an OS command injection vulnerability in the Git process runner reported by Veracode.

Reviewer: Is there a CVE for this? Could be this (https://zeropath.com/blog/git-gui-cve-2025-46334-arbitrary-code-execution)  but needs to be checked with  version control team.
```suggestion
- We resolved an OS command injection vulnerability in the Git process runner reported by Veracode.
```

Author: Checking in MCR Support: https://mendix.slack.com/archives/C04JZDSNPLP/p1771844939758019

Author: No CVE needed

> - Resolved an issue where partially cloned apps were mistakenly identified as fully cloned during the cloning process, potentially leading to a 128 error.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- We resolved an issue where partially cloned apps were mistakenly identified as fully cloned during the cloning process, potentially leading to a 128 error.
```

- We fixed an issue on macOS where some views would behave in unwanted ways when scrolling.
- We fixed an issue in the React client where enabling autofocus on a popup that only contained focusable elements in the header or footer resulted in no element being focused.
- We fixed an issue where autofocus was not enabled for login dialogs and popups shown by the `Show message` action.

> - We fixed an issue where logging in with incorrect credentials would throw an error in the client console instead of showing a validation message. This was caused by the Runtime not returning a 401 response for authentication failures. We also fixed the same issue for license-related errors where a 402 response was not being returned. (Ticket 268509)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- We fixed an issue where signing in with incorrect credentials would throw an error in the client console instead of showing a validation message. This was caused by the Runtime not returning a 401 response for authentication failures. We also fixed the same issue for license-related errors where a 402 response was not being returned. (Ticket 268509)
```

> - Fixed TabContainer not updating the active tab attribute or firing the onChange nanoflow on tab switch when the TabContainer entity is passed as a nanoflow argument.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- We fixed an issue where a TabContainer was not updating the active tab attribute or firing the onChange nanoflow on tab switch when the TabContainer entity was passed as a nanoflow argument.
```

- We added non-interrupting event sub-processes to the workflow editor. This allows users to trigger optional process flows at any point during a workflow's execution. By using the `notify workflow` mechanism and targeting the sub-process's start event, these additional flows can be initiated without interrupting the main workflow. For more information, see [Event Sub-Processes](/refguide/workflow-event-sub-processes/).
- We added an `allowUpload` flag on `file` and `image` properties that provides upload capabilities to progressive web apps. We added new types `EditableFileValue` and `EditableImageValue` to provide upload-related methods (such as `setValue` and `setValidator`). This flag is optional to ensure backwards compatibility, with the default value being `false`. Native widgets do not currently support this feature.

### Improvements

- We introduced an opt-in runtime setting `MaxRetrieveAmount` that limits the maximum amount of objects retrieved by database datasource operation. (Tickets 236618, 247111)

> - We improved performance for repeatable containment widgets that contain an input widget, when not running the React client. This improvement is particularly noticeable in scenarios where a DG2 has multiple columns configured with custom content containing input widgets. (Ticket 251521)

Reviewer 3: @ConnorLand similarly to my other request, we need to drop these release notes from this release since we had to revert the changes related to.

> We improved performance for repeatable containment widgets that contain an input widget, when not running the React client. This improvement is particularly noticeable in scenarios where a DG2 has multiple columns configured with custom content containing input widgets. (Ticket 251521)

Author: Removed. https://github.com/mendix/docs/pull/10767/commits

- We fixed an issue in several right-click context menus that made MacOS several hotkey combinations display incorrectly.
- We fixed an `SQLite Error 5: 'database is locked'` error.
- We fixed an issue where 'access denied' exceptions could occur during rebase, merge, cherry-pick, revert, or feature branch merge operations.
- We fixed an issue where Maia explain for Microflows crashed sometimes.
- We fixed an issue in Maia chat causing it to crash when a Studio Pro version attribute was missing in a reference.
- We fixed scenarios in Android where navigating fields of a Dataview, of different types, was not possible using an external keyboard.
- We fixed an issue in the **Call external action** activity in Studio Pro where resolving inconsistencies would clear additional attributes.
- We fixed an issue in the OpenAPI documents of published REST services. The dates used in examples now use correct values.
- We fixed `com.mendix.systemwideinterfaces.core.IUser::getUserName` which was always returning the user name at the time of login. It is now returning the actual user name after a cached session has been revalidated.

> - Resolved an OS command injection vulnerability in the Git process runner reported by Veracode.

Author: Getting final language for this RN here on slack: https://mendix.slack.com/archives/C63U54B6K/p1772035244974589?thread_ts=1772034075.454189&cid=C63U54B6K

---
title: "11.8"
url: /releasenotes/studio-pro/11.8/
description: "The release notes for Mendix Studio Pro 11.8 (including all patches) with details on new features, bug fixes, and known issues."
weight: 92
---

## 11.8.0 {#1180}

**Release date: Febuary ___, 2026**

{{% button color="info" href="https://marketplace.mendix.com/link/studiopro/11.8.0" text="Go to Marketplace" title="Download version 11.8.0 from the Marketplace" %}}

For more guidance, see the official [11.8 Mendix release blog](____________).

### New Features

#### Unified Maia Experience: Maia Make

> With Mendix 11.8, we are introducing [Maia Make](/refguide/maia-make/), a unified conversational interface within Studio Pro that consolidates all AI-assisted development capabilities into a single chat experience. Start a conversation, describe what you need in natural language, and Maia generates the necessary artifacts for you—data structures, overview pages, microflows, and more. Whether you are creating new documents or iterating on existing work, Maia Make provides a streamlined, task-based approach to building applications with AI assistance.

Reviewer: Last sentence is unnecessary and rather more like Marketing than a release note.

```suggestion
With Mendix 11.8, we are introducing [Maia Make](/refguide/maia-make/), a unified conversational interface within Studio Pro that consolidates all AI-assisted development capabilities into a single chat experience. Start a conversation, describe what you need in natural language, and Maia generates the necessary artifacts for you—data structures, overview pages, microflows, and more.
```

The following Maia capabilities have been seamlessly moved to the new Maia Make experience:

* [Maia for Domain Model](/refguide/maia-for-domain-model/): Generate domain models from natural language descriptions
* [Maia for Pages](/refguide/maia-for-pages/): Generate overview pages from natural language descriptions
* [Maia Chat](/refguide/maia-chat/) in Studio Pro: Conversational assistance for general development queries
* [Maia Explain](/refguide/maia-expain/): Get clear explanations of your logic and pages

Maia Make also introduces the following new capabilities to accelerate your development:

* [Maia for Microflows](/refguide/maia-for-microflows/): Generate microflows including XPath constraints and expressions, and more
* [MCP Client](/refguide/maia-mcp/): Connect to compatible MCP Servers to leverage tools such as Playwright or Figma
* User Story Linking: Select an existing story and let Maia help you realize it

> Maia Make is enabled by default. It is possible to disable it in Studio Pro **Preferences**, via the **Maia** tab. For more information, see [Maia Make](/refguide/maia-make/).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Maia Make is enabled by default. You can disable it in Studio Pro **Preferences**, via the **Maia** tab. For more information, see [Maia Make](/refguide/maia-make/).
```
